Today we will discuss the
benefits and functionality of
GPIOs on our block diagram.
This will be on the
bidirectional communication
channel between the Serializer
and Deserializer.
In this course we'll define what
the purpose of GPIOs is, define
the system benefits of GPIOs,
explain the terminology of GPIO
in the context of a GMSL link,
explain the methods of
interfacing with the GPIOs, and
outline the options for GPIO
configurations such as pull up
or pull downs, transmit and
receive IDs, and more.
At the core of even the most
complicated systems, a simple
pulse like a reset signal,
control pulse or synchronization
pulse are needed for low level
commands.
That is where the humble GPIO
can be the companion to these
complex systems.
In systems with GMSL, the SerDes
devices can transport this
signal over long distances to
help a remote sensor communicate
with a local microcontroller.
The SerDes devices convert this
discrete signal into a packet to
send over the GMSL link.
GPIO stands for General Purpose
Input or Output.
It's a simple feature that can
be utilized for purposes of
outputting digital signals or
receiving digital signal inputs
with a logic high or a logic low
voltage.
GPIOs are extremely common and
almost assumed to be on every
microcontroller or processor.
In general, GPIOs do not provide
significant current to output
loads and instead operate at
standard logic levels as lower
speed control signals.
GPIOs are useful, but their
usefulness quickly diminishes
when faced with great distance
between GPIO interfaces.
How useful are GPIOs in an
application where a sensor and
its controller are a long
distance apart?
A standard logic level signal
over a wire does not travel
extremely far and it will slowly
degrade due to the losses in the
cable.
However, with GMSL in the
system, there are already long
video and data paths that go
back and forth between these
applications.
So is there a way to utilize the
GMSL link?
This is where GMSL comes in to
allow long distance GPIO state
transmission through its
packetized link.
Since the GMSL link is a
packetized one, it allows for
diverse applications.
These packets allow GPIO state
transmission at the same time as
video and other data within the
link.
GMSL SerDes can transmit GPIO
states that are received on the
pins from one side to the other.
The GMSL SerDes is also capable
of toggling the GPIO statement
program via registers.
A microcontroller can send an
I2C command over the GMSL link
to remotely control the GPIO on
the other end of the link.
First let us look inside the
devices.
The GPIO feature exists on all
GMSL devices and you can access
this feature through the multi
function pins or MFP's.
The main consideration is to
determine the direction of the
GPIO signal transmission.
Every GPIO can be configured as
an input, output or input slash
output.
However the GPIO cannot be
configured to be input and
output at the same time.
The GPIO signal direction must
be determined to configure the
GPIO pins as an INPUT on the
Serializer, an output on the
Deserializer, or vice versa.
At this point it is good to
clarify the transmit TX or
receive RX nomenclature that
will be used with the GPI that
opens at configuration.
The GPIO pin enabled as TX will
transmit its received logic
input pin state to the GMSL
link.
Conversely, the GPIO pin enabled
as RX will receive the remote
logic state from the GMSL link
and transmit that state out to
its local pin.
Remember that the transmit TX
and receive RX is in reference
to the internal GMSL link.
Aside from the direction of the
GPIO signal, there are a
handful of settings used to set
up the GPIOs based on the
required need, such as the
transmit and receive ID, pull
down, pull up configuration,
jitter reduction, and status
reporting.
We'll review the operation of
each of these features next.
The GPIO capability is also very
flexible within the GMSL
devices.
Each GPIO on one side of the
GMSL link can be mapped to any
GPIO on the remote side using a
5 bit transmit receive ID that
is configurable for up to 32
unique GPIO mappings to map GPIO
pins together through the GMSL
link.
The transmitting GPIO needs to
have the same transmit ID as the
receive ID that the receiving
GPIO has been configured for.
The transmit and receive IDs are
by default matched up to their
GPIO numbers.
So GPIO 0 will have a receive
and transmit ID of hex 0 on both
devices and they match up by
default.
If the IDs do not match the GPIO
will not propagate through.
The pins configured as GPIO pins
on the GMSL device also have
configurable and optional pull
up and pull down resistors.
The output driver type is also
selectable as open drain or push
pull circuits and their edge
rates can be adjusted.
It is recommended to use lower
value external pull up and pull
down resistors for stronger pull
up and pull down.
In certain applications jitter
on the GPI of a signal could be
a concern for stricter timing
requirements.
GMSL devices offer a delayed
compensation mode which helps
minimize jitter by adding a
fixed delay to the GPIO
transmission.
The delay is programmable in the
order of a few microseconds with
the benefit of significant
jitter reduction on the signal.
GMSL devices can also report the
GPIO pin logic state by pulling
the GPIO in bit first.
The microprocessor sends a read
command and waits for the
returning packet as the command
travels to the remote SerDes
device and returns to logic low.
When the input changes and the
micro checks the state again, it
is detected as a logic high.
The GPIOs pins can also be
manually controlled via writing
to the device registers to pull
at logic high or low or to
report back the received state.
This can be helpful when GPIOs
on the peripheral devices are
limited.
Let's summarize what we've
covered in this course.
What is the purpose of GPIOs?
GPIOs are simple pins that allow
receiving a signal input or
transmitting a signal output.
What are the system benefits of
GPIOs in a GMSL system?
GPIOs can be used for a variety
of low level commands like
reset, enable synchronization,
etcetera.
How do you explain the
terminology of GPIO in the
context of a GMSL link?
GPIO directions on the GMSL link
need to be thought of in terms
of the direction that the GPI of
a signal is travelling.
For example, if an SoC wants to
communicate with an imager, the
SoC would output a signal to the
Deserializer.
The Deserializer would then
transmit the signal across the
link for the Serializer to
receive the signal.
The Serializer would then output
the received signal.
How do you explain the methods
of interfacing with the GPIOs
GPIOs can be received and
transmitted as low level signals
going into and out of the GMSL
link using I2C communication.
GPIO states can be read from a
register or GPIO states can be
set from a register.
What are the options for GPIO
configurations?
GPIOs can be configured with
transmit and receive IDs for
mapping.
Pull up and pull down resistors
can be enabled and jitter can be
compensated for sensitive
applications with the GMSL link
already in the system.
GPIOs provide a simple but
efficient method of low level
signalling over long distances
for any general purpose.